In 2019, WHO removed gender identity disorder from its list of mental illnesses. Yet there are individuals who disagree with the new designation. Today, we will humor that idea and consider transgender people to be mentally ill.

First, certain facts about mental health that those unburdened by mental illness are often unaware of. For most mental illnesses, there is no way to physically prove a person is afflicted by it. And there is so much variation within, and overlap between mental illnesses that a person's diagnosis can change dramatically if the diagnoser changes. Designations of mental illnesses and understanding of the mind is always changing, and a scientific consensus is not always reached.

Mental health is not unlike physical health, as in a person might be in a poor condition without suffering from a specific illness. Everyone suffers from mental health issues, at least periodically, and no one is in a perfect mental condition anymore than one can be in a perfect physical condition. But even more so than in the physical, distinct mental illnesses are usually for life. They can rarely be cured, so mental health professionals focus on teaching patients skills to cope with their problems, and mitigating the effects with medication. 

Many people seem to have a twisted idea of the purpose of the modern mental health institution. Its purpose is not to police what is normal and what is abhorrent, or to judge the abhorrent and force them to conform to society's expectations for the mere convenience of those who would judge them. Its purpose is to help people live happy lives, to become productive members of society, and to minimize actual harm on society and its people. Anything more is of no consequence and a waste of taxes and the mindpower of science. In other words, modern mental health is the pursuit of material benefits, not of arbitary, ideological values.

Let's return to the transgender question. For those who call for the finding of a cure, it must be said that the very thing has been tried for hundreds of years with zero success. And based on what we know about mental health, such a cure propably doesn't exist. All manners of therapy, conditioning, conversion, hypnosis, medication and torture have been tried to cure people of the transgender affliction. After all the damage inflicted, the patient is often traumatized for life. The end result is one of three, if not all three: utter failure, miserable life in denial or suicide.

But as mental health started losing its medieval ideals of curing for the sake of the cure, modern mental health was born with the focus of improving people's lives. A surgery that kills should not be performed. Mental health professionals started trying different treatments to help transgender people, such as helping them transition to their desired self. A transition of gender may or may not include change of name, social identity, behaviour, voice, clothing, hair, hormone therapy and various surgeries, such as cosmetic, vocal and genital. 

For those who see them as delusional, it would seem contrary to all sense to treat their delusions as valid. Should we not try to make them see reality? But the thing is, transgender people are perfectly aware of all of the facts. They do not hallucinate or perceive their physical form differently than others do. They can be reached and reasoned with like any sane person. They simply do not feel about their inner self the same way that others see them, or they feel a mismatch of their inner and physical self. And these feelings are not something we have ever really managed to change, only repress, with damaging consuquences and often an eventual "relapse". This is why we see even elderly people coming out as transgender, unhappy with their life sofar.

When a person is helped transition, with significant overlook from professionals and accompanied by therapy, giving the option to change mind with every step of the way, remarkable results are achieved. We achieve results, something medicalism has not seen so far. Transgender people who transition generally live happier, more productive lives, the sole purpose of mental health treatment. The only cost is that we must accept them. It has becomea cliché that around 40% of transgender people commit suicide, but this number in fact drops to single digits after a person has transitioned. Certainly better results than driving people to suicide by forced conformity. For those who use the 40% statistic as a kind of attack on transness, or to even prove why a cure must be found, this should show how absurd that line of thinking is. 

Most of those who do kill themselves, do so due to societal pressure. We can alleviate this by being more accepting as a society. Then there are those who detranstition. But the reasons stated are usually, again, societal pressure. And a significant portion of those who detransition, retransition.

So, if being transgender is a mental illness, we have no cure for it. We however, have one very effective treatment. To be most effective, it requires society to treat these people as they wish to be treated. And that is in fact not difficult. And if one thinks society should not be forced to cater to transgender people, it is a rich argument, coming from those who wish individuals to conform to their world view.

In truth we don't know much about "transgenderism" or what causes it. But there are clues that it is not a mental condition, but something else entirely. For one, people seem to be born as trans, developing non-conforming thoughts as children, as soon as they start forming a consciousness of gender and of sex. Second, atypical gender identity is such a prevalent and consistent phenomenon, that it is difficult to write it off as just a specific delusion. Thirdly, if you talk with a transgender person openly and without preconception, as a peer or as a professinal, they just don't seem "crazy". And they seem like they truly are of the gender they identify as.