## Why don't bicycles have suspension?

A ride on a bicycle can be very bumpy and shaky, and a suspension system would certainly increase the rider's comfort, yet they are exclusive to cars and other large vehicles. The reason has mostly to do with weight.

Suspension has purposes besides comfort. The heavier the vehicle, the stronger the forces that affect it. This makes cars much more likely to be damaged by the schocks and vibrations caused by uneven road. Suspension can also make a vehicle faster. The suspension springs allow the vehicle's centre of mass to stay relatively still along the vertical axis, making the path of travel straighter and therefore more efficient. For a light vehicle this is less relevant, as the energy required to move the centre of mass vertically is lesser.

Just as important as the absolute weight of the vehicle, is the relation between the mass of the vehicle and the mass of its load, which consists of both passenger and carriage. A cyclist is usually heavier than their bike, which means that the cyclist contributes more to the centre of mass. And as the human body is mobile, flexible and made of shock absorbant material, it functions as a kind of suspension. This can help with efficient travel and even protect the bike, with the expense of comfort. For a heavy vehicle, the passengers have an insignificant effect.

The mass of the vehicle is constant whereas the mass of its load is variable. This poses a problem for bicycles, where this variable mass is most significant. For a passenger car, we can fairly accurately predict the total weight of the moving body. And that is vital, because for suspension to work correctly, we must use springs with the right spring constant, or tension, depending on the weight. Too high, and the suspension effect is suboptimal. It does not respond fast enough. Too low, and shocks cause the springs to vibrate in a pendulum-like fashion. An optimal spring contracts just enough to counteract the bump, and returns immediately to a still position. For a bicycle, the passenger varies too much in mass and it is impossible to equip one with optimally tense springs.