Entropy is an esoteric term in physics. It represents chaos, randomness, disorder. In a closed system, entropy has a tendency to increase over time. It always takes less energy to increase entropy than to reduce it. For example, two fluids will mix with each other when places in a container, and the temperatures of nearby objects have a tendency to equalize. Everything moves towards a future where everything is scattered everywhere, equally but randomly. In other words, chaos.

The opposite of chaos is order, a state where things are put in their places. Cleaning is an example of creating order, or decreasing entropy. First, objects that have moved to random places, seemingly by a will of their own, are put where they belong. Objects of a category next to their kin, separated from other categories. Next, dust, the excrement of everything, is gathered into one convenient place. Cleaning does not remove dirt, only separates it from the clean.

In high fantasy, it is a common trope to speak of two opposing forces, chaos, representing evil, and order, representing good. It is not an original idea, but one that has bled into fantasy from real world mythology. The idea that order is all that we have, chaos being the loss of it. But it is not the current state, but the transformation that is truly seen as good or evil. When order is created from chaos, we might call that construction, while chaos created from order is destruction. Emotional words that enable us to apply human values to physics.

Indeed, construction is more likely to create happiness than destruction. In accordance to the physical laws, the latter is much easier. Yet destruction is seen as more evil than construction is seen as good. The engendering and growing up of a person is seen as trivial, something to be expected, despite the immense sacrifice it takes. Ending this life takes but a moment, but faces a much larger punishment than the creation saw a reward. Similarly, building a house is a moderate good that may be undone by the great evil of arsony.

But there is subtle double meaning to the word "order". It is not just a state representing a relative lack of chaos, but may also mean a specific order, an arrangement. The building is not worthwhile if all its elements are simply separated, made not random. The molecules must form a specific order to make a brick, and the bricks must follow a specific plan to make up a functional house. Therefore, one cannot say that order as a concept is good. Only specific orders. Everything that is created from chaos, may be called an order. And if that order is somehow unethical, then is not its construction evil and its destruction good?

Most societies are built on a hierarchy. It is a house of cards in a pyramid shape. As an order, its creation took immense effort, yet a breeze could knock it over. If the cards represent people, then we can see how the majority at the bottom are the ones that truly hold society up, yet are under the most pressure from those above. To the majority, such an arrangement is contrary to their interests. Why does it still exist then? Why does such a fragile structure not collapse under the will of the people? There must be forces that counter the will of the people. It is the military, the police, the penal and justice system and the mirage of media that keeps upholds the hierarchy.

Anarchy is a delibirately misunderstood term. It does not represent destruction, even though it wields it as a tool. It does not represent chaos, even though it might be a necessary step. It is the lack of hierarchy, the lack of power. Power is not absolute, it is relative. Power is something one holds over someone else. In anarchy, no one person holds power over any other. The first step towards anarchy is revolution, the destruction of unjust systems. The collapse of the house of cards. It leads to chaos, cards scattered over the table. On the table, no one card is above another. The last step is the construction of a new order, but one without hierarchy. A flat, horizontal power structure. It is anarchy, yet order all the same.

Anarchy does not mean a lack of rules, but a lack of rulers. The rules are decided by all, upheld by all, and applied equally to all. There is no state but the people. No police but the people. No power but the power of all.