For each attribute a person holds, the person is contained within the set of people who have that attribute, while being excluded from the set of people that lack it. If we say that what makes a person an individual is the attributes that they are constructed of, then we can also say that the individual is defined by the sets of people that they are included in. This does not mean that we can reduce an individual to a member of a particular set, but rather to an intersection of all the sets that together define them. As the number of observred attributes grows, the intersection shrinks until it contains but one person, the individual observed.

In the context of identity politics, I would define identity as a set of personal attributes that roughly satisfy the following: first, it must be something that the person has no control over. Second, it must be something that makes society, at least a large part of it, see the person as a member of a distinct group. Things such as sex, sexuality, gender, nationality, etchnicity and race are what constitutes the identity. Age might not fully apply, as every person is constantly moving from one age set to another. The purpose of identity, as defined here, is not to reduce an individual with all their uniqueness to an intersection of particular groups. The purpose is to observe the social role of an individual based on the groups that society forces upon the individual.

(Race is a pseudoscientific social construct. It is unique to humans and is seemingly based on finding common ancestry from within an arbitary period of history. It is not consistent. Historically, peoples such as the Irish, meditarranean peoples and jews have been considered as both not white and white, depending on the political climate. People with one white parent are rarely seen as white, but rather reduced to the race of their other parent. In actuality, race is based on petty things such as outwardly apparent physical features and culture, and the outdated form of anthropology is merely a retroactive justification. But a social construct is not an unreal thing and has very real consequences. Pretending otherwise does not make race disappear as long as there are those who believe in it, and as long as there are measurable social differences between races.)

Identity politics is the weaponizing of identity to advance one's sociopolitical agenda. it is a derogatory term invented by the social right. As such, they control its meaning and the moments where it applies, even though its use has spread across the political spectrum. They have managed to make the social left ashamed by certain practices of their own, while staying almost immune from the word themselves, even when they participate in the very same practices. A favorite practice of the right is tokenism, where an individual or small group of people of a particular identity group is used as a mouthpiece to gather support from that identity group and to falsely signal how the values of that identity group aligns with the values of the socially right.

The social left is criticized for using identity politics, which is seen as inherently bad. When they acknowledge oppression among identities, it is seen as the desire to preserve oppression rather than move on. Meanwhile, the right does nothing to end injustice among identities but merely seeks to hide it. When the left promotes the needs of a disadvantaged group, it is seen as favoritism. Meanwhile, the advantaged groups continue to benefit. When the left listens to a group that is personally affected by a particular problem about that very problem, it is seen as holding the opinion of a group to a higher standard. When people study the social position of a person not as a member of a particular identity group, but as an intersection of many relevant groups, it is mockingly called oppression olympics. It should be noted that when identity is used in the opposite way, to promote an entitled group, it is for whatever reason not called identity politics.

But ironically, it is the social right that is responsible for the creation of identity politics, while the social left ultimately seeks its destruction. As a rule, minorities do not appear from nowhere and demand to be seen and treated differently. It is the social majority that decides their fate. It is the oppressor, not the oppressed, that creates the concept of identity and uses it as a means of oppression. Identity gives birth to identity politics. Inevitably, the oppressed class will fight to kill oppression. As they strive to end the social differences of identities, they are also making identity meaningless and without power. And when identity becomes inconsequential, merely aesthetic, identity politics must lose all their power as well.