Time and time again, we see how bad progressive movements are at branding, and how good bad-faith conservatives are at rebranding their political opponents. It is the conservatives who control the perceived meaning of words in mass discourse. The term 'toxic masculinity' has too fallen victim to this phenomenon. It is a vague term that left too much room for reinterpretation.

The use of toxic masculinity as a term does not suggest that all masculinity is toxic. Nor does it suggest that men hold inherent aspects that are toxic. Masculinity is not the same as the concept of being a man, it is a social construct, an idea that demonstrably varies throughout history and from place to place. The traits that make up masculinity might often be based on biological and anthropological facts, but are still inherently arbitary and based on potentially flawed perceptions. What toxic masculinity suggests is that the current socially accepted definition of masculinity has certain aspects that are toxic or that can manifest in a toxic way.

Toxicity like radioactive waste: difficult to contain and harmful to all, regardless of who is responsible for it. Toxic masculinity is harmful to the individual that displays it, to those around him and to society at large. It rarely has any redeeming qualities, but, absurdly, exists only to cause misery. It is often born out of desire to fit in and to strenghten one's ego. Sometimes, it is born out of desire to do good, but is horribly misguided.

As masculinity is a social phenomenon, so too is toxic masculinity. And as such, it does not simply describe the actions of an individual, but the attitude and expectations of the entire society. Thus, a person who displays toxic qualities of masculinity is not only the perpetrator, but equally the victim of the phenomenon.

One aspect of toxic masculinity is misunderstood and extreme stoicism. Society does not permit men, nor do the men permit themselves, to cry, display or even acknowledge emotions and share their internal troubles. Such things are seen as an inability for logic to triumph over irrational emotions, and as such are signs of weakness and femininity, which is seen as making a man less of a man, and therefore a human of lesser worth. Despite such ideas, men too have human needs for empathy. This torturous self-restraint and denial of humanity to shield oneself from societal ridicule has led to an ever present psychological pandemic. The views on masculinity also holds tight control over what kind of personality and what kinds of interests a man should be allowed to have. This serves the interests of no-one and only limits the freedom of the individual to be oneself.

Men are also seen as inherently violent, and that is not always considered a bad thing. Rather than re-examining these perceptions or helping men grow, violent behaviour is too often brushed aside with a "boys will be boys". This is a defeatist attitude that supposes an inability to improve the behaviour of a man. Children engaged in fights or bullying might not be intervened with. There is too little interest to teach boys ways of constructively and peacefully settling their differences. Men engaged in sexual harassment and assault will likewise find their defenders. It is seen as a sign of high virility, which in turn is seen as an aspect of masculinity and therefore a worthwhile and natural value for a man. The ability to restrain one's urges, contrary to how it is with "feminine" emotions, is not seen as a relevant aspect of masculinity. Weakness in restraint is especially forgiven if the victim is seen as displaying provocative behaviour.

If we take a look at anti-feminist, reactionary groups concerned with men's rights, we find that much of their beef with society is in fact nothing but toxic masculinity. Groups that loath the term the most are, ironically but predictably, some of it's biggest victims. When a man complains that women are only attracted to men that are tall, strong, traditionally handsome and well off, are these preferences not shaped by the society's portrayal of a traditional hyper-masculinity as ideal? If the complaint is that women fall for egocentric assholes, is that not simply "masculine" self-confidence taken to the extreme? And if a man lacks the confidence to find love, it is often because he secretly sees himself as a lesser man. Any unrealistic or harmful expectations that are placed on men, by others or by themselves, is an integral part of toxic masculinity.

Toxic masculinity serves only itself. It has become an organism, a parasite that controls its hosts to ensure its own survival, directing the hosts to commit self-destructive behaviour. It's victims cannot make the distinction between good and bad masculinity, since they see masculinity as an all or nothing -deal. They cannot make changes to the concept of masculinity, because they see it as an eternal structure firmly rooted in biology, forged by nature itself through aeons of evolution. They see any attempt at changing the concept as an attack on masculinity as a whole, and therefore, an attack on the existence of man itself. Even some of those men who recognize the problem are afraid to suggest reforms on masculinity, for they do not want to be seen as traitors, or worse, not men at all.