The Matrix is a movie with the following premise: the world as you know it is in fact a computer simulation, whereas the real world is a post-apocalyptic desert ruled by machines, and all people are suspended in vats, brains connected to the Matrix, the simulation. A group of people are aware of this reality and have managed to escape Matrix into the real world, but are able to re-enter at their will. They are able to make cracks in the code of the Matrix, giving themselves powers and equipment that they use to rebel against the simulation and its programmatic watchdogs, the agents.

The Matrix is heavily influenced by philosophical work. When the protagonist Neo is introduces, the movie shortly displays a book in an semi-important role. It is Simulacra and Simulation by Jean Baudrillard, the postmodern philosopher, a book about how in our world, the things that are real are increasingly replaced by things that imitate the real: the fake objects of simulacra and the fake events of simulation. The Matrix takes this to the extreme, presenting a world that is nothing but a simulation. The idea of living in a simulation is seen in earlier works, first seen in The Butterfly Dream by Zhuang Zhou, where he dreams of being a butterfly but upon waking cannot tell if he is just a butterfly dreaming of being Zhuang Zhou. Later, Descartes doubted whether all he experienced was but an illusion created by an evil daemon. Gilbert Harman evolved this thought experiment to the famous brain in a vat -scenario, an obvious inspiration to the Matrix.

The movie, written and directed by the Wachowskis, had to make concessions to Hollywood. The movie made changes to the script to be more approachable to the masses. One detail changed everything. The movie explains that the purpose of the Matrix is to keep humanity unaware as they are being harvested as "batteries". This is not explained further. It is not hard to see how inefficient this arrangement would be to simply produce energy. But in the original script, human brains were being used as processors, as part of a supercomputer. Not impossible in theory. In fact, it is this supercomputer consisting of humans that runs the simulation. People's brains are simply connected to each other so they can experience the simulation together. In other words, humans are the Matrix.

This bastardization of the script becomes much more significant once we study the purpose of the Matrix. If not to produce resources, what benefit does it offer to the machine overlords? But it appears that the simulation does not exist for the benefit of machine, but of humanity. The desolate desert of the Real is uninhabitable to human life. Living in it would surely seem depressing and purposeless. It is not known why the reality is as it is; it might be a result of a war, a natural disaster or a machine uprising. It might just be how the world always was. It is also not known what the Matrix is a simulation of. It might be the world as it was just before a disaster, or simply a random moment in time. It might be the moment when humans were at their happiest. It might be an evolving world, advancing through the entire history of humankind. Or it might be a complete fabrication, a copy without an original.

We do not know whether the Matrix was the idea of humans past or of machines. It could be that the machines are following a their own interpretation of the laws of robotics, creating a world that minimizes suffering and maximises utilitarian happiness. Perhaps the nature of the simulation is decided, subconsicously, by humans themselves, after all, they are the machine that runs it. The benefit the Matrix offers is evidenced by the fact that not all who are aware or reality are rebelling for that reality. Some choose to succumb to the comfort of the simulation and its pleasures, which as experiences are indistinguishable from real experiences. Some are counterrevolutionaries, conspiring with the agents.

That the deception of the Matrix is a form of mercy is a scarier idea than idea proposed by the movie. It is not a punishment, it is the alternative to an even worse punishment. But the movie is not simply a story but an allegory of our society, the society of simulacra and simulation. And when we take this idea of deception as mercy into the "real" world, it becomes frightening. What is fake has no real value, yet we choose fake experiences over the real. What does that say about the real?

Humans consume so much fiction as escapism. An anti-capitalist might say, that escapism is an invention of the capital, a way to dull our senses and keep us complicit. What are we escaping from? The real, in which we dedicate our lives to create profit for another. All our dreams and goals that we have not yet let go of are aligned with our career. We are pushed to create the ever growing machine that exists for the sake of its existence. The time not spend working towards that is spent recovering from its tiresome effects. We turn to escapism, to substitute a pointless reality with an image of another reality. Many of us live for that escapism. The moment of diving into fiction is the moment we await the most. It becomes the purpose of our lives.

But is there any escape from this? Say we manage to turn into a post-work society, as many are dreaming of. Would you not become bored? Would you turn to the real? Or back to the simulacrum? Without struggle in life, can you find meaning in it? These doubts are the scariest of all. The idea that human has already lost.