Life came to Earth from nothing. Over time, the amount of living life, or biomass, and it's complexity and variety increased. But it won't increase forever, as it's limited by livable space, minerals, energy from the sun etc. Apart from the few cataclysms Terran life has experienced through its history on Earth, life on the planet has a tendency of reaching a certain equilibrium.

Species thrive and diminish. New species are born and old ones go extinct. But the average species is in a more or less stable state. Its population does fluctuate according to the conditions that promote and demote its growth, but these fluctuations tend to be cyclical in nature. Therefore, an average species neither grows or diminishes in population in the long term. Yet when it comes to humans, growth is seen as both natural and necessary, whereas a stable population is a crisis.

The biomass of an ecosystem evolves by necessity so that for every species, there is a larger population down the foodchain. Prey must grow it's population despite being the daily sustenance of another species. Also, the ecosystem can support much larger populations of smaller and simpler organisms, as they consume less and are more efficient. Yet, the human biomass on Earth is over six times greater than that of all wild vertebrates combined. And the biomass of livestock, created entirely for human consumption, is even greater. Human has outgrew the population size that is natural for an organism of such complexity and rate of consumption by a factor of thousands.

For animals that don't suffer from predation, the main factor that controls the growth rate of its population is its ability to procure food. If the population is stable, it is largely because the birthrate is counteracted by a constant death-rate by malnutrition. In nature, such a population is seen as healthy. In a human nation, it is a tragedy.

A stable population naturally forms an age pyramid. For every day of its life, an animal has a chance of dying, and this chance grows as it gets older. Therefore, there are many more young than old animals. Human populations can be mainly divided into three categories by their age pyramid. The first is identical to an average, stable and healthy non-human population: a pyramid shape without a long-term change in population. This is seen in the global south, in countries that suffer from famine and disease. This is seen as a kind of crime against humanity by neglience, but in the animal realm, such conditions are much more common than most people realize. In fact, it is practically a condition for a stable population. The second category is also a pyramid, but one that is growing. This is seen in any nation with a fast population growth rate. Such a population is, for some reason, seen as ideal.

The third category is not a pyramid, but a kind of column. Mostly seen in the global north, in nations with a stable population. This kind of age distribution is almost uniquely human, and is made possible by a reduced drive to procreate, combined with advancements to medicine and general wellbeing. People live to be very old and die quite suddenly past a certain age. Such a population suffers neither suffers calamity, nor has to accomodate new people. There is a problem however: The ratio of the working population to non-working pensioners, who often need extra help and healthcare, is lower than in developing nations. This shouldn't be an issue in a nation of surplus and automation. There are more than enough resources to support an aging population, but that would require a change in the operation of the nation's economy. And rather than deal with that, many call for for forcing the population distribution back to a pyramid shape by promoting growth. That growth is achieved by encouraging procreation and the immigration of young people.

Only a growing human population is seen as problem-free. When a population is not growing, people are actively trying to remove the factors preventing that growth, whether they cause a low birth-rate or a high death-rate. Human nations are unwilling to figure out how to live without an ever-expanding population. But one way or other, human population will reach a plateau, and we are not prepared. There is an eternal debate on how many people the planet can support. But regardless of the answer, large populations will come with their problems. The damage humans do to nature is directly proportional to human population. Population density promotes anxiety and strife, and exponentially increases the deadliness of pandemics.

I believe that beyond a certain number of humans, or certain population density, the happiness of individuals will diminish. Even if that is not true, what is the value of having so many of us? How many billions do we need? Can we calculate the value of human life by adding together the happiness of each individual? Can we also make a sum of all human suffering? The human wish to fill up Earth is nothing more than an primal evolutionary instinct. What was once useful now holds us prisoners. Now that we have conquered nature, can we not also conquer our own nature?


