A scalper is a private person who buys commodities of scarcity and upsells them at a profit. Usually they both purchase and sell on electronic marketplaces. Commodities that have an absolute limit on availability, such as tickets, are particularly of interest to scalpers. Scalpers, as evidenced by their grotesque name, are universally hated. Scalping is also a beautifully succint and essential example of laissez-faire capitalism and the vampirism that plagues it. Here are some points of evidence that scalping is nothing but capitalism in essence.

#### Metamorphosis of commodities
In Capital, Marx writes that capitalists follow a cycle of money-commodity-money. That is, buying something of value and exchanging it for a greater sum of money. The scalper, too, buys things of value with capital with the goal of making a profitable sale. This is opposed to how money works for most people: commodity-money-commodity. For a worker, it could be said, that the original commodity is their own labour. For an artesan, the goods they produce. For both, money is transient and but a means to an end, which is satisfying one's wants. But for a capitalist, the end goal is money itself. For the cycle to be meaningful, they must generate profit or surplus value, which is often generated by the labour of workers, and appropriated by the capitalist. For a scalper, the surplus value comes from exploiting the scarcity of the market.

#### Free market
Scalping could not exist without the free market, the very foundation of capitalism. A free market allows anyone to buy, anyone to sell, and at any price that is agreed upon by both parties. Sales happen on a first come, first served basis. Scalpers are legitimate users of an unregulated market, and are difficult to stop without regulating market as a whole. In fact, they cannot be stopped without infringing on the freedom of the market, which capitalists protect with all their power.

#### Supply and demand
To make profit, every capitalist must know the laws of supply and demand. When one dominates, there is abundance, when the other dominates, scarcity. And this ratio is largely what determines prices in a free market. In a truly free market, if businesses could have their will, each commodity would rise and fall in price by the second and without limit. A rich looking person would have to pay more. A haggler less. Scalpers see scarcity within a commodity, and correctly recognize that it's price is too low. A true economist would set the price as high as they can get away with. And as such, the scalper buys the commodity and fixes its price to match the law of supply and demand, thus correcting the mistake of the original seller.

#### Private property
Let's say that a good is available in a pile, for free and in abundance. If one were to take a unit from this pile and put it up for sale, they would never make one. But if many people take many units, until there is nothing left, those will come who begrudgingly pay. The same is true for a pile of goods that have a fair price. An unfair price will not be satisfied unless every unit is either gone or has an equally unfair price, and unless there is still demand. Those who take from the pile only to upsell are buying private property, another foundation of capitalism. It is property that is owned not because it has use value for its owner, but because it has use value for another. It's purpose is to generate profit, but can only do so by exclusion, only if no-one else sells it for a fairer price. In the western world, laws are largely property laws, on which the capitalists hold a vise-like grip.

#### The value of labour
A common critique of the burgeoise is that they make money without doing work. The response is that most of them do work, many for longer days than their employees. But the issue is that their work is not the kind of work that society needs. A commodity is a collection of elements, organized through labour into a specific order that transforms it into something more valuable. But burgeois labour does not, generally, add value to a commodity. They draw their salary from the value created by the labour of others. A scalper might not have employees, but they are still a capitalist. They too do work, researching prices, supplies and demands, economics, rumors. They spend nights standing in queues, refreshing pages, writing scripts to automate their trade. But their work results in a product that is identical to what it was before. Their work adds no value, not to anyone except others like them. They replace a service with one that is inferior for a higher price. Their work is antisocial... not unlike other burgeoise work.