Property, whether as law or as concept, is comprised by two rules: that it's owner may do whatever with it, and that others may not do anything with it. That is, unless giving access to the thing for others is what its owner desires. Right away, we see that property constitutes a net loss of liberty for the world, as one gains use rights and the rest of the world loses them. But further still, it is a total loss for liberty. In a society without property, people are free to use whatever resources they find, and there is no one to stop them. So, the first rule of property is already granted to the one who holds a thing, even without the existence of property as a concept. The only things changed by the ownerhip of that thing is denying access to others. Property is exclusion.

But exclusion is not always bad. Even though it is anti-liberty, liberty is but one part of a greater thing, rights.

Imagine a primitive society that lives by a forest. The people are primarily in charge of their own substinence, but since each has their own interests and specialities, it is more efficient to practice a limited form of division of labour. A lumberjack will cut down many trees, more than he needs for himself, so that he may trade the excess for other necessities, produced by different professions. Alternatively, the society might be built on the basis of sharing instead of trade. In practice, it works the same way, save for the fact that in a society of trade, people receive in accordance of their labour, whereas in a society of sharing, people receive in accordance of their need.

The lumberjack cuts down a tree, and further cuts it into firewood for personal use. It would be unjust for someone to take the processed wood without permission. This is due to two things: first, the lumberjack has a need and want for that wood. It will be used by him personally. Secondly, the wood has become something greater than before. It is a thing made of the natural material, the tree growing in the forest, and the labour that is now encapsulated in it. The labour of finding, cutting, processing and transporting the tree. And the labour belongs entirely to the lumberjack. To take that wood, therefore, would be stealing not only a good, but his labour as well.

The wood has become the lumberjack's personal property, and we generally allow him to exclude others from its use. He then trades part of that wood for fish from a catcher. The goods exchange owners and become the property of their new hands. This is assuming that both parties consent to the trade without pressure, and that both goods contain the labour of their previous owners only. Otherwise, the trade might be unjust. However, a justly received good becomes just property, and may be further traded to a third party, even if the seller is not the one whose labour is contained in the good. When people trade goods they both produced themselves, they are in essence exchanging their labour between each other. It is no different than one asking the other to cut wood for them, and the other asking the one to catch fish. Selling and buying labour can therefore be done justly.

What if someone desires to own the entire forest? It is absurd, for no one owns the forest, and therefore there is no one to purchase the forest from. In this society, people originally come to own things by putting their labour into naturally found resources. But the forest, in its natural state, contains no-one's labour. And why would one desire the forest? They will never have the strength to cut every tree, nor the need for all the wood. They only wish to trade the forest. But how can they trade that which they did not buy, nor contains any labour of their own?

Let us not consider how, but someone comes to own the forest. They have gained no liberty, and have no use for what they own. They only seek to exclude. This is the nature of private property, and its goal is to generate profit not by ones own labour, but by the mere ownership of it. The forest owner asks lumberjacks to come and chop wood. The simplest way to pay the workers is by wood, which they may then trade for any other means of substenance. If a lumberjack cuts a tree's worth of wood, their fair pay would be an equal amount of wood that they cut. But the forest owner lets the workers keep only half of what they cut. No one would take such a deal, when a free tree cut gives all the wood it contains. Only when there is no free left unowned, must the lumberjack succumb to this wage labour. And the owner of the trees, nevermind how they came to be that, waits for a tree to be cut. The wood then contains the labour of a worker. And the owner takes half of it, and with it, half of the worker's labour, giving no labour of their own in return.

One might ask, if one toils hard and accumulates great wealth, do they not deserve to use that wealth to buy property that would become their livelihood? But how does any amount of work give one the entitlement to the labour of others? One might ask, is wage labour not a fair and just trade, seeing that it is consensual? But one cannot consent with a gun to one's head. And as we saw, no one would work for a wage if they could work for the whole fruit of their labour. And if a society depends on wood, someone will have to work in that forest. There is no choice.

In a modern capitalist society, almost everyting is privately owned, and very few own any of it. And when all the land, the resources it bears and the machines that process those resources are not accessible to the common folk, there is usually no legal way to gain the means of substenance except by money. And for most, there is no legal way to gain money except by wage labour. The choice is between crime, death, and succumbing to capital. This is the extent of consent people are afforded. For some, there is a chance of gaining capital, breaking free of being exploited by means of exploiting others, and thus, becoming part of the problem.